=pod

=head1 NAME

B<super_mediator> - IPFIX Mediator

=head1 SYNOPSIS

     super_mediator   [--config CONFIG_FILE_NAME]
                      [--in INPUT_SPECIFIER] [--out OUTPUT_SPECIFIER]
                      [--ipfix-port PORT] [--export-port PORT]
                      [--ipfix-input TRANSPORT_PROTOCOL]
                      [--output-mode TRANSPORT_PROTOCOL]
                      [--watch POLL_TIME]
                      [--move PROCESSED_INPUT_DIRECTORY] [--lock]
                      [--rotate ROTATE_SECONDS]
                      [--no-stats] [--preserve-obdomain] [--dns-dedup]
                      [--groups SPREAD_GROUPS]
                      [--udp-temp-timeout TIMEOUT_SECONDS]
                      [--log LOG_SPECIFIER]
                      [--log-dir LOG_PATH]
                      [--daemonize] [--pidfile PIDFILE_NAME]
                      [--fields FIELD_LIST]
                      [--print-headers]
                      [--sleep MICROSECONDS]
                      [--verbose] [--quiet] [--version]
                      [--become-user UNPRIVILEGED_USER]
                      [--become-group UNPRIVILEGED_GROUP]
                      [--metadata-export] [--rewrite-ssl-certs]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<super_mediator> is an IPFIX Mediator to be used as a manifold for yaf(1)
IPFIX export data.  It has multiple means of reading and writing IPFIX.
A limited number of options can be specified on the command line.  For
advanced configuration with multiple collectors, multiple exporters,
and filtering, the configuration file super_mediator.conf(1) should be used.
Command line arguments for collection will override collectors defined
in the configuration file. Command line arguments for exporters will be ignored
if a configuration file is provided.

B<super_mediator> can read from an IPFIX file, watch for files in a given
directory, collect IPFIX from yaf(1) via TCP or UDP on a given host and
port, or subscribe to a series of Spread Groups.  It can have multiple incoming
sources and export to multiple collectors.  It
can export to a single or rotating IPFIX, CSV, or JSON files, via UDP or TCP,
and
to multiple Spread Groups.

B<super_mediator> can filter on import and/or export.  Filters can be defined
in the configuration file.

B<super_mediator> is capable of collecting all of YAF Deep Packet Inspection
data (see yafdpi(1)). For advanced configuration of the DPI to CSV output, see
super_mediator.conf(1).

=head2 DNS Deduplication

For DNS, B<super_mediator> can perform
deduplication on the incoming DNS resource records.  It will cache a key
containing the resource record name (rrname), resource record type (rrtype),
and the resource record value (rrval).  When a resource record is seen matching
this key, B<super_mediator> will increment the hit count and the last_seen
timestamp associated with the record.  If it is a new record, the record will
be exported. Each record will be exported to the appropriate exporter.  The
text format is:

    first_seen | rrtype | rrname | rrval

(see below for IPFIX template)

Records will be periodically flushed.  The default is to flush a record
from the buffer once it has reached the desired hit count (default is 500)
or a new
record has not been seen within a time window (default is 5 minutes).
These default behaviors can be
modified in the configuration file.  Similarly, a file can be written upon
flush time.  If this is the case, the text format would be:

    first_seen | last_seen | rrtype | rrname | hitcount | rrval

There is also the option to BASE 64 encode all DNS domain names in a
text file.  This option can be specified in the configuration file.

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 Configuration File Option

When possible, the configuration file should be used when running
B<super_mediator>.  However, some command line options are provided as a
convenience for quick analysis.

=over 4

=item B<--config> I<CONFIGURATION_FILE>

I<CONFIGURATION_FILE> is the configuration file following the guidelines
given in the B<super_mediator.conf(1)> man page.  If this option is given,
it should be the only command line option given.

=back

=head2 Input Options

These options control where B<super_mediator> will take its input from.
B<super_mediator> can read IPFIX messages from a file, directory, live on a TCP
or UDP port, or by subscribing to Spread group(s) through the Spread daemon.
By default, if no input options are given, B<super_mediator> reads an IPFIX
file on standard input.

=over 4

=item B<--in> I<INPUT_SPECIFIER>

I<INPUT_SPECIFIER> is an input specifier.
B<super_mediator> assumes I<INPUT_SPECIFIER> is an IPFIX file unless additional
input options are given.  If I<INPUT_SPECIFIER> is C<->, B<super_mediator>
reads from the standard input.  If B<--ipfix-input> is given and
set to TCP or UDP, I<INPUT_SPECIFIER> is the hostname or IP Address of the host
to listen
on.  (Use B<--ipfix-port> to specify the port.)  If B<--ipfix-input> is SPREAD,
I<INPUT_SPECIFIER> is the daemon name of the Spread daemon
to connect to.  If the Spread daemon is running on remote host, the remote
host or IP should be given in the form daemon_name@hostname.  If
B<--watch> is given, I<INPUT_SPECIFIER> should be a file glob pattern, which
must be
escaped or quoted to prevent shell expansion.  Files that match this pattern
will be processed by B<super_mediator>.

=item B<--ipfix-port> I<PORT>

If <--ipfix-input> is present, export flows to TCP or UDP on port I<port>.
If not present, the default port 18000 is used.

=item B<--ipfix-input> I<TRANSPORT_PROTOCOL>

If present, causes B<super_mediator> to operate as an IPFIX collector,
listening for connections via the specified protocol I<TRANSPORT_PROTOCOL>
from a yaf(1) exporter named in the I<INPUT_SPECIFIER>.  Valid
I<TRANSPORT_PROTOCOL> values are B<tcp>, B<udp>, and B<spread>;  B<spread>
is only available if B<super_mediator> was built with Spread support.  UDP
is not recommended, as it is not a reliable transport protocol, and cannot
guarantee delivery of messages.  If B<spread> is specified, B<--groups> must
also be present.

=item B<--watch> I<POLL_TIME>

If present, process files that match the pattern given to B<--in> every
I<POLL_TIME> seconds.
B<super_mediator> will run forever waiting for files that match the pattern.
B<--watch> should be used with B<--move>.  If B<--move> is not present, files
will be deleted after they have been processed.

=item B<--move> I<PROCESSED_INPUT_DIRECTORY>

If present, input files will be moved to I<PROCESSED_INPUT_DIRECTORY> after
they have been successfully processed.  If this is not present with B<--watch>,
files will be deleted after they are processed.

=item B<--lock>

If present, B<super_mediator> will not read files that are locked, which
means they have the extension ".lock" appended to the end of the filename.
This can be used if B<super_mediator> is reading from a yaf(1) export
directory and yaf(1) is run with B<--lock>.  This will prevent
B<super_mediator> from removing the files out from under yaf(1).  This
does not lock files that B<super_mediator> is writing to.  Use the
B<super_mediator> configuration file to enable locking of output files.

=item B<--groups> SPREAD_GROUPS

If B<--ipfix-input> is present and set to B<spread>, use B<--group> to
specify the the Spread group name(s) to subscribe to.  It is possible
to list more than one group name in a comma-separated list.  See the
Spread Documentation, www.spread.org, for more details on Spread.

=back

=head2 Output Options

These options control where B<super_mediator> will send its output.
B<super_mediator> can write flows to an IPFIX file, text file, or to
an IPFIX collector over TCP, UDP, or Spread.  By default, if no options
are given, yaf(1) writes IPFIX to standard out.

=over 4

=item B<--out> I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER>

I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> is an output specifier.
B<super_mediator> treats I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> an IPFIX file unless additional
output options are given.  If I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> is C<->, B<super_mediator>
writes to the standard output.  If B<--output-mode> is present
and set to TCP or UDP, the I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> specifies the hostname or IP
address of the collector to which the flows will be exported.  Otherwise, if
B<--output-mode> is set to SPREAD, the I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> should be the
Spread daemon name.  If the Spread daemon name is running on a remote host,
it should be in the form daemon_name@hostname.  If B<--output-mode> is set to
TEXT, I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> is a filename in which the flows will be written in
pipe-delimited format.  If B<--output-mode> is set to
JSON, I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> is a filename in which the flows will be written in
JSON format.
If <--rotate> is present, I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> is the prefix name of each output
file to write to.  B<super_mediator> must be able to make an initial connection
to the I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER> for B<super_mediator> to start.  If the connection is
lost after the initial connection, B<super_mediator> will immediately retry
the connection after reporting a warning message to the log.  If the retry is
unsuccessful, B<super_mediator> will retry the connection every 15 seconds until
the connection is successful.  Flows will be lost while the connection is down.

=item B<--export-port> I<PORT>

If B<--output-mode> is present and set to TCP or UDP, export flows to port
I<PORT>.  If not present, the default port 18001 will be used.

=item B<--output-mode> I<TRANSPORT_PROTOCOL>

If present, causes B<super_mediator> to operate as an IPFIX or TEXT Exporter,
exporting via the specified protocol I<TRANSPORT_PROTOCOL>
to a collector (e.g rwflowpack, flowcap) named in the I<OUTPUT_SPECIFIER>.
Valid I<TRANSPORT_PROTOCOL> values are B<tcp>, B<udp>, B<text>, and B<json>;
B<spread> is only available through the configuration file.
UDP is not recommended, as it is not a reliable transport protocol, and cannot
guarantee delivery of messages.

=item B<--udp-temp-timeout> I<TIMEOUT_SECS>

Set UDP template timeout in seconds if B<--ipfix> is set to I<udp>.
As per RFC 5101 recommendations, B<super_mediator> will attempt to export
templates three times within I<TEMPLATE_TIMEOUT>.  The
default template timeout period is 600 seconds (10 minutes).

=item B<--no-stats>

If present, B<super_mediator> will not forward yaf(1) process statistics records
or log statistics.  It is possible to configure certain exporters to process
stats while others ignore stats messages.  This must be done with through the
B<super_mediator> configuration file.

=item B<--preserve-obdomain>

If present, B<super_mediator> will not overwrite the observation domain in the
incoming IPFIX records.  If given and the incoming records do not have an
observationDomainId element, the exported records will have a domain of zero.
B<super_mediator>'s default behavior is to copy the observation domain ID from
the incoming IPFIX messages' headers to the records it exports, overwriting
any previous observationDomainId value in the records.

=item B<--sleep> I<MICROSECONDS>

If present, B<super_mediator> will sleep for I<MICROSECONDS> between each
call to fBufAppend, which appends the IPFIX messages to the output source.
This is useful if B<super_mediator> is reading an IPFIX file and transmitting
IPFIX over UDP.  B<super_mediator> may send the messages too quickly for the
IPFIX Collector to receive them (possibly dropping messages.)  This option
is only available with one collector and one exporter when executing
B<super_mediator> from the command line.

=item B<--fields> I<FIELD_LIST>

If present and B<--output-mode=TEXT> or B<--output-mode=JSON> is also present,
write only the fields
given in I<FIELD_LIST>. I<FIELD_LIST> is a list of integers corresponding to
flow fields, separated by a comma.  The list of acceptable fields are listed
in super_mediator.conf(1) under B<FIELDS>.  Only the integer representation of
the field is accepted.  The below example will print:
stime|etime|sip|dip|sport|dport|protocol|applabel
for each flow to the file given to B<--out>.

=over 1

=item B<--fields 18,19,0,1,4,5,6,7>

=back

=item B<--metadata-export>

If present, B<super_mediator> will include information element and template
metadata in ipfix output.  It is possible to configure ipfix exporters to
include this metadata via the B<super_mediator> configuration file.

=item B<--rewrite-ssl-certs>

If specified, B<super_mediator> will, for IPFIX exporters, rewrite the
SSL certificate records that are represented in a subTemplateList on
the SSL DPI record (template 51722 (0xca0a)).  The rewriting changes
the structure of template 51723 (0xca0b) and eliminates template 52756
(0xce14).  The new SSL certificate record has explicit information
elements for parts of the certificate's issuer and subject instead of
having data stored in a list of key-value pairs.

=item B<--print-headers>

If present for TEXT Exporters, B<super_mediator> will write a header for
delimited flow data.  If files rotate, it will write one header at the
top of each flow data file.  Ignored for custom field lists.

=back

=head2 Logging and Daemon Configuration

=over 4

=item B<--log> I<LOG_SPECIFIER>

Specifies the destination for log messages.  B<LOG_FILE> can be a B<syslog(3)>
facility name, the special value B<stderr> for standard error, or the absolute
path to a file for file logging.  The default log specifier is B<stderr>.
The log level can be specified by the B<LOGLEVEL> keyword in the
B<super_mediator> configuration file or by using one of the following two
options.  Default level is WARNING.

=item B<--log-dir> I<LOG_PATH>

If present, B<super_mediator> will write log files to
I<LOG_PATH>.  I<LOG_PATH> must be a
complete directory path.  The log files have the form

I<LOG_PATH>/sm-YYYYMMDD.log

where YYYYMMDD is the current date.  The log files are
rotated at midnight local time.  When the log files are
rotated a new log is opened, the previous file is closed,
and B<gzip(1)> is invoked on the previous day's log file.
(Old log files will not be removed by B<super_mediator>.)

=item B<--verbose>

If present, log all messages.  The default log level is B<WARNING>. This option
will change the log level to B<DEBUG> and log all B<yaf(1)> and
B<super_mediator> process statistics, along with any IO operations.

=item B<--quiet>

If present, turn off logging completely.  B<super_mediator> will not log errors.

=item B<--daemonize>

If present, B<super_mediator> will become a daemon.

=item B<--pidfile> I<PIDFILE_NAME>

Set the complete path to the file in which B<super_mediator> writes its
process ID (pid) when running as a daemon.  B<--pidfile> is ignored if
B<--daemon> is not present.

=back

=head2 Privilege Options

These options are used to cause B<super_mediator> to drop privileges when
running as root
for live capture purposes.

=over 4

=item B<--become-user> I<UNPRIVILEGED_USER>

After opening the live capture device in B<--live> mode, drop
privilege to the named user. Using B<--become-user> requires B<super_mediator>
to
be run  as root or setuid root. This option will cause all files
written by B<super_mediator> to be owned by the user I<UNPRIVILEGED_USER> and
the
user's primary group; use B<--become-group> as well to change the group
B<super_mediator> runs as for output purposes.

If running as root for live capture purposes and B<--become-user> is not
present, B<super_mediator> will warn that privilege is not being dropped. We
highly
recommend the use of this option, especially in production environments,
for security purposes.

=item B<--become-group> I<UNPRIVILEGED_GROUP>

B<--become-group> can be used to change the group from the default of
the user given in B<--become-user>.  This option has no effect if
given without the B<--become-user> option as well.

=back

=head2 DNS Deduplication Option

=over 4

=item B<--dns-dedup>

If preset, B<super_mediator> will cache DNS resource records and emit records
only when new ones are seen or B<super_mediator> has seen 500 of the same
records, by default.  DNS de-duplication can be further configured in the
B<super_mediator> configuration file.

=back

=head1 IPFIX Export Templates

The following IPFIX fields are exported by B<super_mediator>.  DPI
information will be exported in the same format as received by yaf(1), with
the exception of the de-duplicated DNS records.  Any statistics option
messages will also be formatted in the same format as they are received.

=head2 FLOW_ONLY Record

Some fields are only exported if they are non-zero and were enabled in B<yaf>.
B<super_mediator> exports many variations of the following template.  The
following list contains all of the possible elements that could exist
in the FLOW_ONLY record.  Reverse elements are only exported if
reversePacketTotalCount or reversePacketDeltaCount is nonzero.

=over 1

    flowStartMilliseconds, IE 152, 8 octets, unsigned

    flowEndMilliseconds, IE 153, 8 octets, unsigned

    octetTotalCount, IE 85, 8 octets, unsigned

    reverseOctetTotalCount Reverse IE 85 (PEN 29305), 8 octets, unsigned

    packetTotalcount, IE 86, 8 octets, unsigned

    reversePacketTotalcount, Reverse IE 86 (PEN 29305), 8 octets, unsigned

    octetDeltaCount, IE 1, 8 octets, unsigned

    reverseOctetDeltaCount, reverse IE 1 (PEN 29305), 8 octets, unsigned

    packetDeltaCount, IE 2, 8 octets, unsigned

    reversePacketDeltaCount, reverse IE 2 (PEN 29305), 8 octets, unsigned

    sourceIPv6Address, IE 27, 16 octets, unsigned

    destinationIPv6Address, IE 28, 16 octets, unsigned

    sourceIPv4Address, IE 8, 4 octets, unsigned

    destinationIPv4Address, IE 12, 4 octets, unsigned

    sourceTransportPort, IE 7, 2 octets, unsigned

    destinationTransportPort, IE 11, 2 octets, unsigned

    flowAttributes, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 40, 2 octets, unsigned

    reverseFlowAttributes, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 16424, 2 octets, unsigned

    protocolIdentifier, IE 4, 1 octet, unsigned

    flowEndReason, IE 136, 1 octet, unsigned

    silkAppLabel, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 33, 2 octets, unsigned

    reverseFlowDeltaMilliseconds, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 21, 4 octets, unsigned

    tcpSequenceNumber, IE 184, 4 octets, unsigned

    reverseTcpSequenceNumber, Reverse IE 184 (PEN 29305), 4 octets, unsigned

    initialTCPFlags, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 14, 1 octet, unsigned

    unionTCPFlags, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 15, 1 octet, unsigned

    reverseInitialTCPFlags, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 16398, 1 octet, unsigned

    reverseUnionTCPFlags, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 16399, 1 octet, unsigned

    vlanId, IE 58, 2 octets, unsigned

    reverseVlanId, Reverse IE 58 (PEN 29305), 2 octets, unsigned

    ipClassOfService, IE 5, 1 octet, unsigned

    reverseIpClassOfService, Reverse IE 15 (PEN 29305), 1 octet, unsigned

    mplsTopLabelStackSection, IE 70, 3 octets, unsigned

    mplsLabelStackSection2, IE 71, 3 octets, unsigned

    mplsLabelStackSection3, IE 72, 3 octets, unsigned

    observationDomainId, IE 149, 4 octets, unsigned

        The observation domain ID of the yaf(1) process that
        generated the flow.

    subTemplateMultiList, IE 293, Variable Length

=back

=head2 DNS De-duplicated Record

=over 1

    flowStartMilliseconds, IE 152, 8 octets, unsigned

        The time in milliseconds of when the DNS resource record was
        first seen.

    flowEndMilliseconds, IE 153, 8 octets, unsigned

        The time in milliseconds of the last record seen by
        B<super_mediator>. This is only exported if
        B<super_mediator> is configured to LAST_SEEN.

    sourceIPv4Address, IE 8, 4 octets, unsigned

        The IPv4 Address found in a DNS A Record.

    dnsTTL, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 199, 4 octets, unsigned

        The maximum TTL seen for the aggregated DNS records.
        This is only exported if B<super_mediator> is
        configured to LAST_SEEN.

    dnsQRType, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 175, 2 octets, unsigned

        The type of Resource Record.  This corresponds
        with the QTYPE filed in the DNS Question Section
        or the TYP field in the DNS Resource Record Section.

    dnsHitCount, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 228, 2 octets, unsigned

        The number of times B<super_mediator> saw
        this record in the FLUSH TIMEOUT period.
        This is only exported if B<super_mediator> is
        configured to LAST_SEEN.

    dnsQName, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 179, variable length

        A DNS Response Name.  This field corresponds
        with the NAME field in the DNS Resource Record Section.

    dnsRName, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 927, variable length

       A DNS Resource Record Data Element.  This field
       corresponds with the RDATA in the DNS Resource
       Record Section.  For CNAME records, this will be the
       canonical name. For NS Records, this will be the
       name server name.  For AAAA records, this will be an
       IPv6 Address, etc.

    observationDomainName IE 300, variable length

       This field is populated if the DEDUP_CONFIG block was
       configured with B<ADD_EXPORTER_NAME>
       or DNS_DEDUP was configured with a B<VLAN_MAP> or B<OBID_MAP>.
       See super_mediator.conf(1) for more information on MAPS.

=back

=head2 Tombstone Options Template

B<Super_mediator> will forward and can optionally generate tombstone records
using IPFIX Options Template Records.  These records are intended to allow the
analysis of the time it takes for records to be processed by each tool (eg.
YAF, Super Mediator, SiLK) in your environment.  Each tombstone record generated
by  B<super_mediator> consists of six information elements: the observation
domain ID set by the B<--observation-domain> argument, the exporting process ID
which is the PID of the YAF process, a user- settable tombstone ID, a
sequentially increasing  "tombstoneId" for each record, the timestamp of the
record's creation, and a subTemplateList of the time each program interacted
with the tombstone record. With ideal randomness and/or proper user arguments,
the 4 IDs taken together should uniquely specify a record. Tombstone record
generation is not on by default and can be turned on using the  TOMBSTONE_CONFIG
section of the config file. Tombstone Records are only  sent/forwarded to
exporters configured to receive stats records.

The following Information Elements will be exported:

=over 1

    observationDomainId, IE 149, 4 octets, unsigned

       The (user-set) observation domain of the generating sensor.

    exportingProcessId, IE 144, 4 octets, unsigned

       The PID of the generating sensor.

    tombstoneId, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 550, 4 octets, unsigned

       A sequentially increasing identification number unique to each tombstone
       record in a run of a given program.

    exporterConfiguredId, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 551, 2 octets, unsigned

       An identification number for the record that is user specifiable at
       runtime and shared across all records in a run of the given program.

    observationTimeSeconds, IE 322, 4 octets, dateTimeSeconds

       The UNIX timestamp of when the record was created.

    tombstoneAccessList, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 554, variable length, subTemplateList

       A subTemplateList consisting of Tombstone Access Templates (see below)
       that specify when each program that supports tombstone time-stamping
       interacted with the tombstone record.

=back

=head2 Tombstone Access Template

The following two Information Elements will be exported as a template within the
subTemplateList of a Tombstone Options Template:

=over 1

    certToolId, CERT (PEN 6871) IE 553, 4 octets, unsigned

       The identification number of the program that interacted with the record.
       B<super_mediator> has and ID of 2.

    observationTimeSeconds, IE 322, 4 octets, dateTimeSeconds

       The UNIX timestamp of when the program interacted with the record.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

To run super_mediator with the configuration file:

C<super_mediator -c /usr/local/etc/super_mediator.conf>

To read a yaf(1) file and write delimited text to stdout:

C<super_mediator -i yaffile.yaf -o - -m text>

To listen for connections from yaf(1) via TCP and write to rotating text files:

C<super_mediator -i localhost --ipfix-port 18000 --ipfix-input TCP --out /tmp/mediator --rotate 120 --log /tmp/mediator.log -v>

To listen for connections from yaf(1) via UDP and send output to a rwflowpack
process running on TCP port 18001:

C<super_mediator -p 18000 --ipfix-input UDP -o localhost -m TCP --export-port 18001>

To only print the time and 5-tuple for each flow to stdout:

C<super_mediator -i /myyaffile.yaf -o - -m TEXT --fields=18,19,0,1,4,5,6>


=head1 KNOWN ISSUES

B<super_mediator> will not create new file directories.  All output
directories must exist before you start B<super_mediator>.

B<yaf> presently encodes the ICMP type and code information into the
destinationTransportPort information element for ICMP and ICMP6 flows.
B<super_mediator> running in TEXT output mode writes the type in the
sourceTransportPort field and the ICMP code in the destinationTransportPort
field.

=head1 AUTHORS

Emily Sarneso and the CERT Network Situational Awareness Group Engineering
Team E<lt>http://www.cert.org/netsaE<gt>.  Bug reports and feature requests
may be sent via email to E<lt>netsa-help@cert.orgE<gt>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

super_mediator.conf(1), yaf(1), yafdpi(1),
Spread Documentation at www.spread.org, and the following IETF
Internet RFCs: Specification of the IPFIX Protocol for Exchange of IP
Traffic Flow Information B<RFC 5101>, Information Model for IP Flow Information
Export B<RFC 5102>, Export of Structured Data in B<RFC 6313>.

=cut
